Now I will introduce you to if statements.
If statements are perhaps the easiest of the coding control flow statements to understand.
And that's because if statements are the kinds of constructions that we use every day in our lives.
So for example, if I'm thirsty, then I will drink some water.
If it's raining out, then I will stay home and watch Futurama.
Whatever are the if then statements that you use in your normal life.
It works the same way in Python.
So we start off with if that's the key statement, you can see.
Again, it's a reserved keyword.
And then there needs to be some statement that can evaluate to true or false.
So in this case I'm just writing out the word true.
The boolean true.
So obviously this is always going to be true.
True is always going to be true.
And then uh again we see a colon.
And then we have two spaces and all of the text that appears after the, uh, the if statement after
the colon and is indented is part of the if statement.
Okay.
So done.
So now we see.
Hi.
Done.
Now I'm going to change this to be false.
False correctly spelled.
So now Python will say if this conditional is true then I run everything else in the if statement all
the way up until we get back to spaces before.
Okay.
And now I only see the word done.
I don't see the word hi.
And why do I not see the word hi?
Because this is false.
It never activated.
Okay, so this word here true or false?
This is the conditional of an if statement.
It needs to be some statement that evaluates to a boolean true or false.
So it can be something like testing for equality here.
This is going to evaluate to false.
Okay.
So let's try something else here I will actually I'll put this in this code cell I'm going to generate
a number.
This is going to be a random number.
And it's going to be somewhere between uh well it's just going to be a random Gaussian number with an
expected average of zero.
And it can take on positive and negative numbers.
Okay.
So here's just a bunch of random numbers.
And now what I'm going to do is test whether this is positive.
So if num is greater than zero.
And then I'm going to print the print the number.
So very simple okay.
So what's going to happen when I run this code.
You may have seen me deleting something.
And what do you think will happen when I run this code.
It's going to give an error.
And why is it going to give an error.
Well it says actually very clearly it expected a colon.
Okay.
And just to make sure this is also really clear here, I just manually put in two spaces here.
Run the code again and again.
I get the same error message here.
So you really need that colon here.
Okay.
So now I'm going to keep running this multiple times here.
There's no output because the number happened to be negative purely by chance.
Okay.
And whenever it's positive it's going to print out the random number.
Now what if we also wanted to know what the number was when it's negative.
So you can think of doing something like this.
If num is negative then print num.
But this is kind of okay.
But it's not really the best way to deal with this situation.
What we are going to add here is something called an else statement.
So if this is true then run this code.
But if this is false then run this code.
Okay.
Again this is your typical if else statement that you would use in the real world.
And maybe I will say right this positive position positive like this.
And here is going to be negative like this.
Okay.
So now you see we're always getting some output.
And yeah the question is whether it's this being printed depending on whether this evaluates to true
or this, uh, this being run when this expression here this conditional evaluates to false.
The next concept in if statements that I would like to introduce you to is called conjunctive conditionals.
That's where we are testing not only for one expression to be true or false, but multiple expressions.
So for example, I can write if four equals four and uh one is less than three, then I'll print.
Uh.
Yeah.
Both conditions are true.
And otherwise I'm going to print.
At least one condition is false.
Like this.
Okay, so now Python is going to see this.
And word again reserved keyword.
And it says that I will run this code only if this is true.
And this is also true.
So for example I can change this to five.
And now this is true.
So one is less than three.
But this is not true.
And that means that this entire expression becomes false.
So I can just run that over here.
So four equals five and one less than three.
That is false.
But there's another reserved conditional keyword called or.
And now this ends up being true.
And why is this true.
Because when we use or we're asking for whether this one or this one.
So at least one conditional must be true.
So if I would replace this with or and now this message is is no longer accurate.
But that's okay.
But it did run.
So you now understand that at least one of these is true.
I'll set that back to end.
The last thing I want to introduce you to in this video is embedding an if statement inside a for loop.
But first I need to introduce you to the modulus operator.
That's the percent sign in Python.
And it gives us the modulus which is also called the remainder in math.
So for example if we were to divide five by two well you know that answer is 2.5.
But we can also say that the answer is two with a remainder of one.
Right.
Because two times two gives us four.
And then to get up to five we have a remainder of one okay.
So we can write 5% Two.
In Python speak you would call this mod or modulus or modulo.
And that gives us one.
And what does this number mean?
This number means that two goes into five any number of times any.
You know, this operation doesn't tell us how many times two goes into five, but two goes into five
with a remainder of one.
And that's what this tells us.
Now you can use the modulus operator for lots of different things, but one of the applications that
it's most commonly used for is to determine whether a number is even or odd.
And that's because all odd numbers have a modulus of one when dividing by two, and all even numbers
have a modulus of zero when dividing by two.
So let's look at this I'm going to write numpy dot arrange ten.
So this is just numbers from zero up to nine.
Actually maybe let's go up to ten.
And now mod two like this.
So this is 0101 actually.
Okay, maybe let me do it this way.
Print like this and then print numpy dot a range.
Of 11 mod two.
Like this okay so here we see the spacing isn't perfectly aligned here but the numbers go uh zero.
And then we have an odd number, an even number, an odd number, an even number, and so on.
And here we have ones for.
So in the uh, the modulus, we have ones for all of the odd numbers and zeros for all of the even numbers.
So this is a way to determine whether a given number is even or odd.
Okay.
So with all of that as background let's write a for loop and an if statement.
So for n in range let's go up to I don't know how about 20.
And uh so now what I'm going to write is if n mod two equals zero, print that the string of this number
is an even number.
And then I'm just highlighting this and copying it else.
This is an odd number.
Okay.
So now we get zero.
So actually this is a question in math whether zero is an even or an odd number.
Maybe to avoid that annoying ambiguity we can just start at one.
One is an odd number, two is an even number.
And so on, all the way up to 19 because I wrote the number 20 over here.
Very good.
So what you see here.
So you learned about the modulus operator.
And you also learned about embedding control statements inside other control statements.
So I have an if else statement that is embedded inside this for loop.